---
layout: article
meta_title: Report
meta_description: About page description
body_class: about
title: Report
---

# Decentralization Off The Shelf: 7 Maxims

<div class="authors">

**Authors**

- Eileen Wagner (Simply Secure)
- Karissa McKelvey (Digital Democracy)
- Kelsie Nabben (RMIT University)
  </div>

_With funding support from SamsungNEXT, DxOS, and the Shuttleworth
Foundation._

## Executive Summary

A growing number of technologists are challenging the consolidation of
power over digital information systems by creating _decentralized_
protocols and applications. Where government and corporate control are
causing harm, decentralized technologies can bring about autonomy,
resilience, and equity. However, there is a significant gap between
decentralized protocols and the applications that users want to adopt,
and until now there hasn't been a systematic survey of the needs and
challenges for the people and projects involved.

Through a series of interviews and focus groups with technology
designers and builders, we have identified 7 areas where projects can
improve their own practice; where targeted research is necessary; and
where funders need to step in to enable collaborative innovations.

1.  **Collaboration.** Projects need to collaborate on a stronger, galvanizing narrative by leveraging strategies from campaigning and movement building.

2.  **Design.** Designers need new patterns and approaches for driving the development of decentralized protocols and applications.

3.  **Infrastructure.** Funders need to prioritize the independent verifiability and resilience of shared digital infrastructure, such as app stores, browsers, hardware, and networking.

4.  **Developer onboarding.** Developers need more accessible education materials and training modules for decentralized architecture patterns.

5.  **Trust models.** Projects need to design with vulnerable populations in mind, and adopt privacy and safety frameworks specific to decentralization.

6.  **Sustainability.** Funders need to innovate on strategies for sustaining projects and attracting talent.

7.  **Governance.** Technologies need to define governance models to align value and build a sustainable culture for long-term project value and stability.

These themes emerged from our research as well as our experience in
having worked in decentralization as protocol developers, UX designers,
and researchers.

This research is part of [[Decentralization Off The
Shelf]{.underline}](https://decentpatterns.xyz), a collective initiative
to identify needs, synthesize priorities, provide resources, and
coordinate efforts to further the development and deployment of
decentralized technologies. By addressing these issues, we aim to
support the design and development of better user-facing tools that are
backed by decentralized architecture and increase the overall quantity
and quality of decentralized applications.

## Table of Contents

## Introduction

"Decentralization" is a loaded term. At face value, it describes
technical and social architectures that are not centralized---either
because they have no central control or authority, or because they have
many centers of power. But digging deeper in the research areas,
developer communities, and political movements, you will not find a
uniform or consistent description of the values and approaches to
decentralization. On what level (networking, application, providers)
should decentralization happen? Is decentralization best realized by
peer-to-peer or federated models? These and many more questions divide
the community.

Perhaps more polarized than technical disagreements are political ones:
practitioners see decentralization both as a way towards
self-determination---gaining independence from large corporations or
governments---as well as means towards more equity and co-ownership.
Some projects focus on revolutionizing the banking economy, others fight
against censorship and surveillance of human rights defenders, while yet
others work to make science more open and efficient. Many practitioners
believe that decentralization is the next step of human progress, but
some also believe it will be the last working technology in a dystopian
future. Decentralization is, to say the least, a mixed bag of
ideologies.

While the motivations for decentralization are heterogenous, the goal,
however, is clear: better usability and more adoption. Despite the rapid
growth of some decentralized protocols, however, key challenges remain
across the domains. It is our hope to identify those common challenges
and work towards generalized solutions. This report serves as a starting
point, and we welcome comments and feedback from the community.
